# 1840s Rain Gauges relating to MS&LR

A lot of the MS&LR locations have rainfall records for the 1850s; these are clearly labelled as 'MS&LR' on the rainfall sheet and tie up readily with the MS&LR sheets for later decades. Some of the 1850s sheets have entries in the early 1850s and so these locations could potentially have records for the 1840s too.

The *TYRain_1840-1849_E_pt1.pdf* file in the Met Office archive has several sheets which relate to locations in Derbyshire, Cheshire and Lancashire that are also present in the later MS&LR sheets, but none of them are explicitly labelled with 'MS&LR'. The records in the sheets are usually intermittent, with many of them concentrating on 1847 and years just before then.

These 1840s sheets do have a likely MS&LR connection, as they are referenced in the [1848 report](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=2RUHAAAAQAAJ) produced by [Samual Homersham](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S._C._Homersham) who was a Civil Engineer working for MS&LR.

## The 1848 Report

In the late 1840s, Manchester Corporation were planning to build a chain of new reservoirs in the Longdendale valley. The 1848 report described the benefits of an alternative scheme being proposed by MS&LR, which would provide water collected on MS&LR land to Manchester instead. 

MS&LR owned two canals which had associated reservoirs that were filled by water draining from surrounding Peak District hills:

* the Peak Forest Canal, associated with:
  * Todd Brook reservoir near Whaley Bridge
  * Combs reservoir, near Chapel-en-le-Frith
* the Macclesfield Canal, associated with:
  * Bosley reservoir, near Congleton

MS&LR's plan was for the water to be delivered to Manchester's existing Gorton reservoir via the Ashton Canal, which linked up to the Peak Forest Canal near Ashton-under-Lyne. The report described how this would provide cheaper and cleaner water, in greater quantities and more reliably, than Manchester Corporation's Longdenvale scheme.

This [Canal &amp; River Trust web page](https://canalrivertrust.org.uk/enjoy-the-waterways/canal-and-river-network/ashton-canal) has a useful map of the area relevant to the 1848 Report.

Rain gauge measurements formed the basis of some of Homersham's arguments, with some of the rain gauge data presented in the report matching well to sheets in the Met Office 1840s archive, often at locations that MS&LR went on to make measurements at or near for decades to come.

The report document ends with a copy of a paper presented by Somersham to the Royal Society on May 25th 1848, which discusses the impact of altitude on rainfall, as evidenced by rain gauge data from the MS&LR reservoirs and their surrounding hills.

*In the end, it seems that MS&LR's report did not persuade Manchester Corporation to change its mind - the [Longdendale Chain](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Longdendale_Chain) Reservoirs were built from the late 1840s onwards, and some remain in use today.*

## Rain Gauges in the 1848 Report

The 1848 Report and associated Royal Society paper provide three main tables of rain gauge data:
* page 38 shows rainfall figures for the 1840s for a number of places around Manchester
* page 53 shows rainfall figures for 1844-47 for Manchester, Marple, Combs and Chapel-en-le-Frith to illustrate the effect of altitude
* page 125 (p8 of the Royal Society paper) shows rainfall figures from three MS&LR reservoirs and nearby hills, again to illustrate the effect of altitude

There is also a mention in the 1848 Report (on p54) of a rain gauge 'fixed at Waterhouse Lock' in relation to heavy rainfall over a 12-hour period. Waterhouse Lock is on the Ashton Canal's Hollinwood branch, another canal owned by MS&LR.

The page numbers quoted here are PDF page numbers, taken from a PDF copy of the Report downloaded from the [Google Books site](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=2RUHAAAAQAAJ).

The rain gauges found in the Report are presented in the tables below. The 'Possible Sheet' field indicates a rainfall sheet (as a page number in the TYRain_1840-1849_E_pt1 volume PDF file) in the Met Office Archive which looks to be a reasonable match to this rain gauge's data.

Sites associated with MS&LR:

|Site|Altitude (ft)|Dates|Data from|Sheet|
|:---|:-------|:--------|:----|:----|
|Fairfield|220|1843-47|J.Meadows|p38|
|Marple|531|1844-47|J.Meadows|p16|
|Comb's Reservoir|720|1844-47|J.Meadows|p4|
|Comb's Ridge|1670|1847|J.Meadows|p2 [Combs Moss]|
|Chapel-en-le-Frith Engine Station|1121|1840-47|J.Meadows|p5|
|Newton Station|350|1847|J.Meadows|-|
|Woodhead Tunnel|1000|1847|J.Meadows|p10|
|Todd Brook Reservoir|620|1847|J.Meadows|p14 [Whaley]|
|Todd's Brook, Brinks*|1500|1847|J.Meadows|p26 [Brinks Edge]|
|Bosley Minns|1265|1848|Commissioned by Somersham|-|
|Bosley Reservoir|590|1848|Commissioned by Somersham|-|
|Waterhouse Lock|-|-|Commissioned by Somersham|p53|

* James Meadows was the Secretary of the MS&RL Company, so where the Report says data was supplied by J.Meadows, it seems likely these were MS&LR-run gauges. Page 124 of the Report says that Somersham himself requested the Bosley rain gauges be set up.
* Todd's Brook, Brinks seems to refer to the [rain gauge near Brink Farm](https://maps.nls.uk/geo/explore/#zoom=16&lat=53.31108&lon=-2.04873&layers=6&b=1) on Sponds Hill, on the western slopes of Todd Brook reservoir, grid reference SJ968793. (The elevation is more like 1200 ft than the quoted 1500 ft). This site is referred to as 'Bollington Sponds Hill' in later MS&LR sheets. Page 53 of the Report shows 1847 monthly rainfall figures for 'Todd Brook', Brinks which match the figures on p28 of the Met Office archive, for the sheet labelled 'Woodhead, Brinks Edge'. The word 'Woodhead' has been added at a later date, and is incorrect.

For some of the MS&LR locations above, the Met Office 1840s Archive also has other sheets that do not tie up to the figures in the 1848 Report. The Report  discusses aspects of rain gauge design and some experiments performed to verify their accuracy, so these sheets may perhaps relate to these experiments:

|Location|Other sheets|
|:-------|:-----------|
|Combs Reservoir|p3|
|Marple Top|p15|
|Bosley Reservoir|p17|
|Fairfield|p41|

Sites mentioned in the report not associated with MS&LR later sites:

|Site|Altitude (ft)|Dates|Data from|Sheet|
|:---|:-------|:--------|:----|:----|
|Belmont Spring water reservoir, Sharples|850|1843-47|J.Magnall|p57|
|Bolton|320|1832-1847|H.H.Watson|p46|
|Bury|300|1832-1844|J.Norris|
|Rochdale|500|1832-47|J.Ecroyd|p55|
|Whiteholme Reservoir, Blackstone Edge|1500|1832-47|R.Mathews|
|Manchester|120|1844-47|Ronchetti of 43 Market Street|

## Another Reference to 1840s MS&LR-related Rain Gauges 

[Volume VI of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society's Memoirs](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=Jd5CAQAAMAAJ), published in 1842, includes an article on Rainfall. This quotes 1840 monthly rainfall figures for four locations associated with the Peak Forest Canal (which was bought by one of the railway companies which merged in 1847 to become MS&LR).

The Met Office Archive has rainfall sheets matching the 1840 figures for all four locations (again in the TYRain_1840-1849_E_pt1 archive):

|Site|Altitude (ft)|Possible Sheet|
|:---|:-------|:-----|
|Fairfield|320|p41|
|Marple|531|p15|
|Comb's Reservoir|850|p3|
|Engine Station, near Chapel-en-le-Frith|1121|p5|

## Tie-up to sets of MS&LR sheets for 1850s+

In relation to the 12 MS&LR-related rain gauges in the 1848 report:
* the rainfall sheets for 9 of them have been located in the Met Office 1840s archive (in the TYRain_1840-1849_E_pt1 volume)
* most of the 12 are in locations that have MS&LR rain gauges for the 1850s+
* but the 1840s records tend to be only for specific years (mostly 1844-47 just prior to the 1848 Report), for a specific purpose rather than being an ongoing record.
* there are also sheets for other gauges, recording different rainfall figures, at some of these locations
* some of the sheets include 1840 figures, recorded in relation to the Peak Forest Canal, at a time before the Canal was owned by a railway company

So I don't think there's a strong need to explicitly link the 1840s MS&LR gauges into the 1850s+ sequences; they may not be fully continuous with the 1850s gauges.

This table summarises the 1840s sheets in the Met Office archive which relate to MS&LR locations, all in the TYRain_1840-1849_E_pt1 volume:

|Site|Altitude (ft)|Sheet|Dates on sheet|Figures used in 1848 Report ?|1840 Figures used in L&P Memoirs ?|
|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|
|Combs Moss|1670|p2|1847|Y|-|
|Combs Reservoir|850|p3|1840, 44-47|-|Y|
|Combs Reservoir|850|p4|1844-47|Y|-|
|Chapel en le Frith|1121|p5|1840, 44-47|Y|Y|
|Whaley Toodsbrook Reservoir|620|p14|1847|Y|-|
|Marple Top [Lock]|531|p15|1840, 44-47|-|Y|
|Marple Top [Lock]|531|p16|1844-47|Y|-|
|Bosley Reservoir|[590?]|p17|1847|-|-|
|Woodhead Station|1000|p10|1847|Y|-|
|~~Woodhead~~ Brinks Edge|1500 [too high]|p26|1847|Y|-|
|Fairfield|320|p38|1845-47|Y|-|
|Fairfield|320|p41|1840, 45-47|-|Y|
|Waterhouses Lock|360|p53|1845-47|(Y)|-|

In addition, the 1848 report implies there were rainfall readings for the following MS&LR-related locations, which have not been located in the Met Office archive:

|Site|Altitude (ft)|Dates on sheet|Figures used in 1848 Report ?|1840 Figures used in L&P Memoirs ?|
|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|
|Newton Station|350|1847|Y|-|
|Bosley Minns|1265|1848|Y [Royal Society paper]|-|
|Bosley Reservoir|590|1848|Y [Royal Society paper]|-|
